---
title: "The Ship of Theseus"
description: "Engineering in the Age of AI"
date: "2025-02-10"
category: "technology"
tags: ["diener.tech", "web", "blogging", "vibe coding", "software engineering"]
---

## Catching a Vibe


During the development of [diener.tech](https://www.diener.tech), I experimented with a number of different technologies. I don't just mean different Javascript or styling frameworks here, but the actual technology used to write code. This website has been built from the ground up, and it's source code is available on [Github](https://github.com/mdiener87/diener-tech), should you decide to take a look. If you do, you might notice an evolution in the commits and branches over time that built out this website. You see - these commits got faster. And bigger. And more complex. They did so all at the same time.

If you've been paying attention to the evolving landscape of AI and software tooling, you already know what I'm talking about: I got into ✨ *Vibe Coding* ✨

Vibe Coding is the emergent phrase describing the use of tools like [Cursor](https://www.cursor.com/) or [Claude Code](https://www.anthropic.com/news/claude-3-7-sonnet) to generate code via prompting. Much like AI has been able to generate art via prompting (such as [Stable diffusion](https://stability.ai/) or [DALLE](https://openai.com/index/dall-e-3/)), so too can it now generate code. *Lots* of code. This is far beyond what an AI-enhanced auto complete can do. We are talking about the ability to generate coherent changes to multiple files simultaneously. With carefully crafted prompting, it seems the generative AI can literally go and build a website for you. Or code up a video game. Or implement a whole API. Or perhaps it should build your entire database. It seems like these tools could do it all for you - front to back, and left to right. Just like that, a finished product!

I don't (yet) get to use these tools in my day-job, but that day is coming. Industry leaders across the board are claiming that 90%, 95%, 99% of the code written in the future, will be generated by various AI systems. And by 'the future', I mean *by the end of this year*. That's, ah, pretty wild? Concerning? Incredibly cool? Every reaction is appropriate here, so don't hold back. This is the stuff of the future. Except even most sci-fi authors seemed to have undersold how articulate and capable AI could become. Those that embraced Strong AI usually have it resulting in happy endings like.. The Matrix. Or The Terminator. Even Wall-E had everyone fat and hopelessly addicted to their computer screens. hmm. *concerning* 

There will be plenty more blog posts about this approaching Singularity of technology in the future. For today, I think its enough to consider a more tactical question: What even is engineering, anyways?


## Engineers on a boat


The [Ship of Thesus](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ship_of_Theseus) is an ancient philosophical question that concerns identity. If a ship regularly has bits of itself replaced over time - is it still the same ship? If these discarded bits were later re-assembled into a new ship, is *that* ship now the original ship? What does it mean to be a 'thing'? When does this become *that*, and when does *that* no longer exist? 

These are questions I found myself pondering as I built this website. Even from conception, I was using [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/) to help with mapping the various technologies I want to use, or the hosting options I should consider. ChatGPT also helped me with some initial scaffolding of core pages and components, saving time staring at an empty page and getting *something* stood up to work against. 

So right from the start, can we say this is my own work? What does it mean to write code, to be a software engineer? Is it about the number of lines of code? Or the cyclomatic complexity? Is it about shipping the end result, or perhaps its about the bugs we made along the way? Early autocomplete systems in IDEs were sometimes derided as 'not real programming' by the grey-beards of the era. If that's the case, then nobody has written 'real code' for some twenty odd years!

If I were chasing home-grown, organic code, perhaps I'd go a very manual route, and write everything by hand. Furthermore, let's say we avoided the meme of Javascript frameworks, and wrote this website entirely in old-school HTML and CSS. Maybe just enough Javascript for a good old `<element>.onClick()` event binding here and there. Would this then be my own work? Because I'm not so sure. While HTML is unremarkable today, it was a major breakthrough when [two engineers from CERN invented it](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTML) over 30 years ago. HTML represented a new, powerful, reusable templating format for creating and representing practically any type of document! It would go on to become the templating language of the web, and thereby play a key part in the internet revolution. Just using some hand-written `<article></article>` tags is employing paradigm-altering technology!

Every action we undertake on a computer is done so by first standing on the shoulders of giants. From the HTML we write, to the pixels we see; from the TCP/IP packets we send, and to the electrons we receive. All of these were incredible breakthroughs for the time, and they are now simply the background baseline on which new technologies are built. So is any of this 'my' code? No, comrade - it is all *our* code.

Wikipedia introduces the [engineering page](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Engineering) with this definition:
> Engineering is the practice of using natural science, mathematics, and the engineering design process to solve problems within technology, increase efficiency and productivity, and improve systems 

From this definition, utilizing AI systems to generate software for our own benefit would seem to qualify as engineering. That's good news, for this generative technology is surely the future of this website, and probably everything else too. The AI-augmented world is here, and we are all about to ✨ catch a vibe ✨.
